**The Night Is Darkest Before The Dawn**

The Rambam (Hilchos Megila 1:3) and Rabbeinu Tam (Tosfos, Megila 4a, Chayav Adam Likros quotes the Ree, Rabbeinu Yitzchak) disagree as to whether one recites the blessing of Shehecheyanu prior to reading the Megila on the morning of Purim. According to the Rambam, we do not recite it because we already did so at night. Rabbeinu Tam says that we do recite it again, because the main obligation to read the Megila is by day, Ikar Kriyasa Bayom. Some explain that Megila is a twofold Mitzva. A mitzvah Mdivrei Kabalah (mentioned by the prophets though not explicitly mentioned in the Torah) of Hayamim Hayleh Nizkarim Vnaasim, these days [of Purim] are remembered and practiced, which has a direct reference to the obligation to perform by day, without mention of the [previous] night. According to the Divrei Kabalah, which is also referred to as Divrei Nviim, the enactment was specifically limited to the day. We read the Megila at night based on a Takanah of Rabbi Yehoshua Ben Levi, who says that we are obligated to read the Megila at night and repeat it by day, based on the verse (Psalms 22) Elokay Ekra Yomam Vlo Taaneh Vlayla Vlo Dumiah Li (Megila 4a). Thus the obligation to read at night is a Takanas Chazal. However the main Mitzva is by day, therefore according to Rabbeinu Tam, we make Shehecheyanu by day as well.

The Rav noted the following difficulty: whether Mikra Megila is a Takanas Neviim or Takanas Chazal, in the final analysis we perform the same Mitzva, of reading the Megila, twice. So why should we recite Shehecheyanu again in the morning? The Rav answered based on the Gemara (Megila 14a) that asks why don’t we recite Hallel on Purim? The Gemara offers two answers. The first is that we do not recite Hallel on a miracle that occurred in Chutz L’aaretz. This answer is supplemented by the statement we are still servants of Achashvayrosh, that the redemption of Purim was not complete. The second answer is that the reading of the Megila takes the place of the recitation of Hallel. In other words, we do recite Hallel on Purim, but it is a different form of Hallel from what we normally recite, as the Purim Hallel assumes the form of Megila. The Rambam cites the second answer, that reading the Megila is Hallel (Hilchos Chanukah 3:6). 

There are two Kiyumim, fulfillments of Mitzva, in the reading of the Megila: reading the Megila for its own sake, and Megila as a recitation of Hallel. But this Hallel is unique from all other recitations of Hallel that incorporate the standard format of Hallel from Tehillim and is recited on Yom Tov, Chanukah and Rosh Chodesh. On Purim the recitation of Hallel must be done specifically through the format of the Megila. When a Jew reads the Megila he has two Kiyumim, reading the Megila and a special Kiyum of Hallel on Purim that is different from the Kiyum of Hallel throughout the year. It is a different Cheftza (object) of Hallel, not a Hallel based on Hallel Hamitzri, but rather praise and thanks to Hashem based on the text of the Megila. Since Hallel is only recited by day, this Kiyum can only be fulfilled by day. Hence the requirement to recite Shehecheyanu again by day when we fulfill this unique, once a year form of Hallel. With the exception of Pesach, we do not recite Hallel at night (based on the verse Hashir Yihye Lachem Klayl Hiskadesh Chag (Isaiah 30))(Psachim 95b). Therefore the night of Purim has only one Kiyum: that of Mikra (reading the) Megila, not Hallel.  On Purim day there are 2 Kiyumim, and the Shehecheyanu covers the unique Kiyum Mitzvah which we did not fulfill the previous night, of Hallel through the Megila. So Shehecheyanu is recited at night for Mikra Megila and by day for Mitzvas Hallel.

[The Rav asked why would we recite Shehecheyanu on Hallel Purim when we don’t recite Shehecheyanu on Hallel during the year when we recite it  on various occasions? The Rav answered that the traditional Hallel Hamitzri is recited a number of times throughout the year, hence we do not recite Shehecheyanu. However the unique Hallel of Megila comes only once a year, therefore it is appropriate to recite Shehecheyanu over it.] 

Why did Chazal institute this unique form of Hallel for Purim? If they were already instituting some form of praise to Hashem for the miracle of Purim, why not use the same format as was used for Chanukah, that of Hallel Hamitzri? Why link the two Kiyumim into one act of reading the Megila? For example on Pesach night we have a Mitzva of Sippur Yetzias Mitzrayim, to tell the story of the exodus, and a separate Mitzva of reciting Hallel which are unique and independent of each other. We don’t say “Sippurah Zu Hillula”, that telling of the story of the exodus is the fulfillment of the Mitzva of Hallel, rather we fulfill both Sippur and Hallel individually. Yet on Purim these distinct Kiyumim of reading the Megila (telling the story) and reciting Hallel were integrated and identified with a single Mitzva act. Why?

The Rav explained that there are 2 forms of Hallel: Hallel Hamitzri and Hallel D’Psukei D’Zimarah. The Gemara (Shabbos 118b) says that one who completes Hallel daily is a blasphemer, Mcharef U’Mgadef. The Gemara asks: this contradicts Rabbi Yossi who said “let my portion be with those that complete Hallel daily”? The Gemara answers that Rabbi Yossi was referring to reciting Hallel D’Psukei D’Zimarah, the last 6 chapters of Thillim starting with Tehilla L’David, which is viewed favorably. Daily recitation of Hallel Hamitzri is viewed negatively and should not be done, because recitation of Hallel Hamitzri was established for a supernatural miracle, Lmaalah Mderech Hateva. In these cases, Hashem is Meshaded, He breaks the laws of nature to perform the miracle. He suspends for a limited time the natural order of Yom Vlayala Lo Yishbosu, Sibuv U’Mesubav. The concepts expressed in Hallel Hamitzri of the Hayam Raah VaYanos refer to a supernatural miracle. What we call Hallel Hagadol is also similar to Hallel Hamitzri, indeed parts of it are included in our Hallel Hamitzri. The same verse which we base the recitation of Hallel Hamitzri on Pesach night, Hashir Yihye Lachem, is also the source for reciting Hallel HaGadol Pesach night. Pesach night is symbolic of the performance of supernatural miracles by Hashem. This is the essence and fundamental idea of Hallel Hamitzri.

The Hallel of Psukei D’Zimrah focuses on a different theme. In this Hallel no supernatural miracles are mentioned. We praise Hashem specifically for His revelation through nature itself, without any supernatural miracles. When man wakes and sees the sun in the east, he should appreciate the wonders of nature and the laws of nature created by Hashem. One who can’t recognize Hashem through the medium of nature is stunted. After all, is the consistency of nature any less of a miracle than the splitting of the sea? Are the natural wonders performed by Hashem [that we take for granted], listed in Barchi Nafshi any less significant? Therefore we say Hallel D’Psukei D’Zimra in praise of Hashem for nature itself.

Judaism does not seek supernatural miracles. The laws of nature established by Hashem at the time of creation were not intended to be broken. Chazal (Shabbos 53b) refer to someone who attempted to tamper with Maasay Breishis as Kamah Garua, despicable. Hashem resorts to supernatural miracles, when the natural processes no longer suffice. Chazal say that had Hashem Himself not acted in obviously miraculous ways in the exodus process the Jews would have completely assimilated into Egyptian society. Chazal describe Hashem resorting to miracles with the parable of a Kohen whose Teruma was lost in the middle of a cemetery (a Kohen is normally forbidden to enter a cemetery). If he abandons the Teruma it will become defiled. If he enters the cemetery to retrieve it, he will defile himself. (Shmos Rabah 16). Hashem’s choice was between remaining outside of Egypt with the ultimate loss of Bnay Yisrael or to so to speak, defile Himself and enter Egypt, for all intents and purposes a cemetery where there was no house without a dead body on the night of Pesach, to rescue His Teruma, Bnay Yisrael. Hashem opted for the latter but we see that Chazal bemoaned the deterioration of the situation of Bnay Yisrael in Mitzrayim, to the point that it required supernatural intervention. As it says VaAyrayd Lhatzilo, and Hashem descended to rescue the Jewish Nation, it was a degradation so to speak, for Hashem to have to rescue Bnay Yisrael through supernatural means. 

The Midrash is saying that had the Jews been on a higher level, there would have been no need for all the miracles visited on the Egyptians. Hashem would not have needed the afflictions of blood, frogs, etc. or the miracles at the Red Sea to free the Jews, as described in the Hallel HaMitzri. After all, the creation and maintenance of the universe, of nature, of biology are significantly greater events than causing the frogs to infest Egypt. For Hashem, the Makot and the inherent suspension of the laws of nature they entailed pales in comparison to the creation and maintenance of nature. Had the Jews been worthy, Hashem would have had no need to suspend nature. Had He waited for the natural miracle process to unfold, they would have assimilated. This is considered a condescension for Hashem, as it says VaAyrayd Lhatzilo. Was the drowning of 600 Egyptians in chariots at the Red Sea remotely comparable to the maintenance of the nebulae throughout the universe and the Yad Hashem everywhere? Of course not! However in emergency situations, Hashem has to resort to extraordinary measures to accomplish His will. But when Jews are deserving, they can accomplish everything through the natural order, without miracles. That’s why Chazal said one who says Hallel Hamitzri every day, one who wants Judaism to exist through the support of supernatural miracles, is a blasphemer. The Gemara said that one who appreciates and praises Hashem through nature, one who follows the statement of Rabbi Yossi that his portion should be with those that complete Hallel of Psukei D’Zimrah daily, is acting admirably and meritoriously.

The miracle of Purim is different from the other miracles (Pesach, Shavuos, etc.) because where those holidays are distinguished by obvious supernatural miracles, Purim was a Nes Nistar, a hidden miracle through the natural process. Chanukah was an obvious miracle from two perspectives, the victory of a tiny force over the armed might of the Assyrian/Greek armies as well as the miracle of the oil that burned for 8 days. The story of Purim does not have any supernatural occurrences. 

Chazal interpret that David wrote Psalm 22 to commemorate Esther (Yuma 29a, Rashi Megila 4a, Midrash Thillim 22). Lamnatzyach Al Ayelas Hashachar Kayli Kayli Lama Azavtani The next verse in that chapter is the aforementioned Elokay Ekra Yomam Vlo Taaneh Vlayla Vlo Dumiah Li. I have called to You by day but You have not answered and at night I have not heard a sound. The next verse is V’Ata Kadosh Yoshev Thilos Yisrael, You are the holy One hidden from the world. [The Rav said that is why we recite Vata Kadosh after the Megila at night, even when Purim is not Motzai Shabbos.] Esther appeared before Achashvayrosh even though everyone knew that anyone who approaches the king without being called to appear is to be put to death unless the king extends his scepter. She knew that her chances of success were dismal because she had not been called to appear before the king for 30 days. Chazal say that Achashvayrosh did not want to extend the scepter to her (Megila 15b). Esther exclaims, in Lamnatzayach Al Ayeles Hashachar that she thought that she would be the medium through which Hashem would send supernatural salvation to the Jews, similar to the miracles performed at the time of the Exodus, or in the time of Gideon. She imagined a salvation based on Hallel Hamitzri. When the supernatural salvation did not appear, and she recognized that Achashvayrosh would not extend his scepter, she realized that she was doomed and called out Kayli Kayli Lama Azavtani, Hashem I called to You, but there was no discernible response. When the scepter was finally extended, she understood that this was to be a Nes Nistar, a hidden salvation. She recited Vata Kadosh Yoshev Thilos Yisrael. 

Kadosh means hidden, separated from others. Kadosh can be positive and negative. For example, Hashem is called Kadosh, separated from everything. A prostitute is called a Kdaysha, as she too is separated from the community in a negative by her actions. Kdoshim Tihyu, requires Havdala, separation. When Hashem conducts the world through nature, He is Kadosh, hidden. When He rescued the Jews from Egypt, He was visible to all, the Jews exclaimed Zeh Kayli V’Anvayhu. When Hashem is hidden and man is perplexed by his inability to discern His plan, He is called Kadosh. Esther said I now understand, Vata Kadosh Yoshev Thilos Yisrael, that the salvation will come through natural means. Our daily praises to Hashem of Hallel D’Psukei D’Zimra are not for supernatural miracles but for the miracles through nature that are shrouded in the obscuring cloud, VaYered Hashem Beanan. Purim is the symbol of Jewish Salvation through ostensibly natural means. For example, it seemed that Haman would conquer the world and his plan would succeed. But Hashem worked His plan in an unobtrusive way that ultimately resulted in salvation for the Jews. That’s why Chazal say that Esther is called Ayelet Hashachar. The morning star does not rise at once. When the Ayelet Hashachar is visible, it is difficult to discern whether the black, night sky is brightening. Only after some time is it clear that indeed the sky has brightened and the day is about to dawn. 

Hallel Hamitzri was not instituted on Purim because Purim is the miracle of Vata Kadosh, when Hashem is hidden and there are no supernatural miracles. No supernatural afflictions befall Haman or Achashvayrosh. The story of Purim describes how the Jews approached the king by fasting and begging for mercy. But in retrospect, we see the hand of Hashem in everything, and though we may think that He is far and removed from us, we must realize V’Ata Kadosh. Even though it might seem that He is separated from the Jewish nation, He is implementing His plan unobtrusively because the Jewish nation does not seek salvation through supernatural miracles, through Hallel Hamitzri. The name of God, Sha-Kay (Shin, Daled, Yud), is not connected to the term Yoshev Thilos, as Sha-Kay comes from the root Shoded, Hashem breaks the laws of nature when performing Hallel HaMitzri type miracles. However, Kadosh is Yoshev Thilos, Hashem hidden from all, acts through the Hallel of Psukei D’Zimrah. When a Haman and an Achashvayrosh can sit down to drink while the Jews are suffering, some might think that there is no justice and there is no judge, Les Din V’Les Dayan. [Note that this Shiur was given in 1956, when the US Secretary of State Dulles favored arming the Arabs against Israel] When a Dulles sits with Arabs and plots against the Jews, just like V’Hamelech V’Haman Yashvu Lishtos, we might despair and say Les Din V’Les Dayan. We can’t! We are confident in Vata Kadosh, we can’t point to Him as Zeh Kayli Vanvayhu, but Vata Kadosh Yoshev Thilos is always there. [How prescient these words seem now in the year 5774, 2014].

We say Vata Kadosh Yoshev Thilos Yisrael Vkara Zeh El Zeh Vamar, Kadosh Kadosh Kadosh Hashem Tzvakos M’lo Chal Haaretz Kvodo. Tzvakos comes from the root Tzava (Tzady, Bet, Aleph) and implies attending to many details, for example the management of an army camp. Another example is the verse VaYechulu Hashamayim Vhaaretz Vchal Tzvaam (Breishis 2:1), heaven and earth and all their details were completed. Hashem is revealed through small details that we do not immediately appreciate. Only later, in retrospect do we appreciate more fully what transpired, as we continue and explain, Kadish Al Arah Ovad Gevurtay. When we ascribe the attribute of Kadosh to Hashem we might be tempted to think that Hashem does not even bother to look at this world. Our situation is so hopeless and Hashem is not interested in helping us. His interest is limited to Asar Beis Shchintay, the place of His Shechina. But we immediately say that is not the case, Kadish Al Arah Ovad Gvurtay. We don’t see Him, but we know that whatever happens on this world is not random, it is through Hashgachas Hashem, it is all part of Hashem’s master plan and ultimately there will be Kadish Lalam Ulalmay Almaya, He will be recognized as holy forever and ever. 

When we recite the Hagadah on Pesach night there is no need to say Vata Kadosh. When we enumerate the Makkot, we acknowledge the obvious revelation of Hashem that took place in Egypt. Hashem was not Kadosh, hidden, that night. Rather, He was visible as Zeh Kayli Vanvayhu, Kchol HaOsos Asher Asa Hashem Bmitzrayim Laynecha, as manifested through all the miracles that Hashem performed before our eyes. However on Purim, when we read the Megila, we read a story of a foolish, drunk king who is led astray by an evil adviser who ultimately bribes the king to murder all the Jews. Haman and the king sit down to drink and the Jews are desperate. One might proclaim at this juncture Les Din Vles Dayan, the Jewish nation is in danger and Hashem is nowhere to be seen. But on that long, bitter night, when it appeared that there was no merit to be found for the Jews and their destruction was imminent and that Hashem was Kadosh, hidden from us, the amazing turning point of the Megila, Balayla Hahu happened. We were (and are) a nation without a friend in the world, despised and rejected by 127 states and nations who eagerly await the appointed day to eradicate them from the face of the earth and push them into the sea, a people for whom no one will lift a hand to defend. On that long bitter night Mordechai pours out his heart and attempts to approach the king and is rebuffed because he is dressed inappropriately. Why does the king need to see this disheveled Jew? He has 40 Arab nations as his friends. Les Din Vles Dayan. But this is the turning point of the Megila. On that night Hashem, hidden in the place of His Shechina, B’Asar Beis Shechintay, began to maneuver events, even while Haman was still in control on the ground. [The Rav remarked that this was similar to events in Eretz Yisrael where Arab regimes were given aid despite their declared intentions to destroy Israel and Saudi Arabia was being supplied with unnecessary tanks by a foolish administration, in the mid 1950’s. Eretz Yisrael was in the same situation as Mordechai relative to Haman’s decree and power. 60 years later we find ourselves in the same situation.] When Mordechai attempted to protest the decree of Haman, he was branded a disloyal officer of the king. After all, if Mordechai was truly loyal to the king, he should be implementing the decree of the king, not protesting it. [The Rav noted that similar accusations have been leveled against the Jews for protesting foolish administration policies that put Eretz Yisrael in grave danger.] But on that dark and bitter night, it was Vata Kadosh, we were far from Yoshev Thilos Yisrael, from imagining that the day of destruction decreed by Haman would turn into a day of celebration and victory over our enemies. Yet Hashem, hidden above in His Bays Shechina, did not sleep, so to speak, and He started, in an innocuous manner, the process of salvation that resulted in the hanging of Haman and Chamas Hamelech Shachacha, the quieting of the anger of Hashem. Achashvayrosh’s insomnia and his anger at Haman later are insignificant here.  In retrospect we see that these events in the Megila refer to Hashem.

One who reads and understands the Megila fulfills Mikra Megila and the Mitzva of Hallel. Chazal say (Megila 19a) that the Megila is called a Sefer, book, and an Igeres, a letter. It is called a Sefer to teach us that it must be sewn up with appropriate thread made from a kosher animal, similar to a Sefer Torah. If it was sewn together with threads of flax it is not acceptable.  Sefer means something written on parchment, something that exists for many generations. Sados BaKesef Yiknu Uksov BaSefer VaChasom, L’Maan Yaamdu Yamim Rabim (Jeremiah 32:44). The prophet was commanded to record the deed in a Sefer in order that it should last for generations as a verifiable document. A Shtar R’ayah, a document for proof, is called a Sefer because it is something that I might need many years from now to prove my ownership. Chazal say that the obligation of a king to write a Sefer Torah requires that he write it on parchment, it is unacceptable to write it on plain paper. Paper does not last, however parchment does. For example, the Dead Sea Scrolls were written on parchment and have survived for thousands of years. If a scribe makes a mistake in a letter on a Mezuza it is Pasul, invalid, (Menachos 28a), because it has an aspect of permanence and must be complete and accurate. However, if one makes a mistake when writing a letter it does not matter. An Igeres, a letter, is transient, after its use it is thrown away. A Sefer is intended to be read by people many years from now; we don’t want it to contain any mistakes. 

The greatness of Megilas Esther is that it is both an Igeres and a Sefer. It is a letter that tells about a drunk, foolish, weak King who killed his queen on the advice of his minister and was led by his wicked prime minister down a path to destroy the Jews. The same fool later murdered his prime minister because he followed the advice of his queen, Esther. This is a common story, where a foolish pliable leader is convinced to adopt dangerous and misguided policies by conniving advisers [no shortage of recent examples, including Nazi Germany and the US administration kowtowing to McCarthy in the 1950s]. Powerful leaders do not fall prey to the advice of such malingerers. But the story and its details are appropriate for a letter, an Igeres, where the story is read and disposed of like a newspaper or magazine. It is news today but of no relevance tomorrow or a year from now. For an Igeres, threads of flax are sufficient to satisfy its limited required duration. However the Megila is also a Sefer and a great book of Jewish History that contains a fundamental principle of Judaism, that Jews recite Hallel not only on supernatural miracles as described in Hallel Hamitzri, but also on natural invisible miracles, as seen in retrospect in the story of Megilas Esther.  It is a Sefer of Balayla Hahu, of that dark sinister night, when the Jews could find no help from heaven above and no ally below. There was no staff of Moshe to perform miracles. No angel came forward to help. At the time, it was not even obvious that Nadeda Shnas Hamelech, that Hashem’s, so to speak, equanimity or sleep was disturbed. Similar to events in Eretz Yisrael today and 70+ years ago when the Nazis, Yimach Shemam, came to power and decimated our people. Only later, after the fact, was it obvious. 

The Megila is a great Sefer that describes how Esther’s first impression was Kayli Kayli Lama Azavtani, that Hashem was not performing visible miracles for the Jews, and in the end she exclaims Vata Kadosh, though Hashem was hidden, the end result was the salvation of the Jews [though a terrible price was exacted from our people]. It describes no less of a miracle than other books of Tanach. Therefore it must be treated the same as the other Sifrei Kodesh, and must be sewn with threads from a Kosher animal, to have the same permanence as the other books of Tanach. 

The Megila  presents us with an important message about the sanctity of the Jewish soul. Chazal explain that when the Megila says Divrei Shalom Vemes, we learn that Megila require Shirtut [etching lines in the parchment] similar to a Sefer Torah, Laamito Shel Torah. Rabbeinu Tam says it means that the Megila has the same importance as a Sefer Torah that contains Shema Yisrael (See Megila 16b, Tosfos Sotah 17b D’H Kasva Igeres, Tosfos Gittin 6b D’H Amar Rabi Yitzckak). Amazingly, the story about a drunkard king and the great Parsha of Shema Yisrael have a common Kedusha and linkage. The Jews in Egypt did not say Shema Yisrael, because they saw supernatural miracles, they exclaimed Ashira L’Hashem Ki Gao Ga’ah, I will sing to Hashem for He is exalted. When do Jews say Shema? When they perish for Kiddush Hashem, martyrdom to sanctify the name of Hashem, on a Balayla Hahu, a bleak and hopeless night. They proclaim Kayli Kayli Lama Azavtani, why have we been abandoned at our time of need? Rabbi Akiva was tortured with steel combs ripping his flesh, yet at that time he saw Hashem and recited Shema. When the Gemara (Megila 14a) asked why don’t we recite Hallel on Purim, Rava replied, what form of Hallel should we recite? Hallel Hamitzri? There were no obvious supernatural miracles on Purim, so Hallel Hamitzri is not appropriate. The greatness of Purim was through Balayla Hahu, the question of Kayli Kayli Lama Azavtani is answered with the juxtaposition of Vata Kadosh. It appeared that Hashem had no contact with the world and the world was controlled by the Hamans, the Muftis, the Arabs [and the Arafats and Abbas] of the world. However we know that Hashem is Yoshev Thilos Yisrael. That is why the Jew recites Uva Ltzion after reading the Megila because this is the central point of the Megila. The main theme of Hallel is expressed through the reading of the Megila, a Sefer that  revolves around the Yoshev Thilos Yisrael and the hidden, natural miracle of salvation.

There is a dispute as to where we start to read from the Megila (Megila 19a). One opinion is that we start from Balayla Hahu, from the start of the salvation. Rabbi Yehuda says we start from the story of the rise of Haman, Rabbi Yossi says M’ish Yehudi, because we need to know who were Mordechai and Esther. Rabbi Mayer says from the beginning. Why should we be interested in the story of an imbecile king and his miserable queen? Why recite blessings and Shehecheyanu on this? The answer is that every detail of the Megila is crucial to the story. Had Achashvayrosh not been drunk, had the king not summoned Vashti, had Vashti not been murdered, Esther would not have become queen. At the time, the Jews did not understand the importance of the episode with Vashti. Only afterwards was it clear that this was the master plan of Hashem to rescue the Jews. The Jews realized in retrospect that the miracle began from the moment the king became drunk that first time. A recognition of V’Ata Kadosh.

It is also important to read all the details because the story of the Megila, of near disaster and salvation through seemingly natural means, has recurred to Jews throughout the generations. We call this day Purim because of the lottery conducted by Haman, but why do we refer to it in the plural? Why not Pur? The Rav explained that had the miracle described in the Megila been a singular event, we would have called it Pur. But since Haman’s intention was attempted many times throughout the millennia, the lesson of reciting Hallel for salvation through natural means applies to those situations as well. 

When Esther asked the Rabbis to canonize the Megila they were hesitant (Megila 7a) until they found a reference in the Torah based on the war with Amalek. The Parsha of Amalek continues throughout all generations. We must constantly review it. It is noteworthy that where Amalek is mentioned we do not find supernatural miracles performed by Hashem for the Jewish People. Hashem showed so many miracles in Egypt and at the Red Sea. However when Amalek attacked, Moshe commanded Joshua to select troops and battle Amalek. Why didn’t Hashem perform miracles with Amalek just like He performed against the Egyptians? Miracles are performed against other enemies of the Jewish People, but not Amalek. Jews must fight Amalek on their own, in the natural realm. Victory over Amalek will only come through Megilas Esther, natural victory that in retrospect will show the hidden hand of Hashem. 

Amalek is not battling the Jews. Rather they are battling so to speak Hashem. Since they could do nothing against the God of the Jews they instead went after the Jews (Hitler acted similarly) and tried to destroy them, all because Mordechai Lo Yichra Vlo Yishtachave, Mordechai lives differently. He has a different diet, calendar, education system. So they attacked him and tried to destroy him. Pharaoh was interested in maintaining the cheap slave labor of the Jewish People, his intentions were different than Amalek, hence a different battle plan was used against him. Where the adversary attacks the Jews, Hashem helps with supernatural miracles. But when the adversary seeks to attack Hashem, then the Jews are on their own. Haman was battling the God of Mordechai, which was the reason that Mordechai will not bow before him. And if Mordechai will not bow, then most likely the rest of his people will not bow before him either and Haman decided to seek their destruction. Haman could have coerced the Jews to do his bidding. But once he involved idolatry, then all Jews resisted him. That’s why he said their religion is different from all others. He was not angry with the Jews, but rather he could not tolerate their unique religion, their commitment to God and His Torah and Mitzvos. In such a situation Hashem works through the motif of Vata Kadosh, He allows the Jews to do battle through natural means and helps them through natural events, but not through obvious miracles.

Throughout our many encounters with Amalek we have been overcome with the emotions of Kayli Kayli Lama Azavtani. We have felt stranded and separated from Hashem. The Jew waits through the long night of exile. Chazal tell us that the end of the night, when the light from the houses has been extinguished and all are asleep, is bleaker than the beginning. At the time of deepest despair, the Ayelet Hashachar rises and the sky and situation begin to brighten. The illumination is unnoticeable at first until it is obvious to all in retrospect. At the end of each encounter with Amalek we conclude Vata Kadosh Yoshev Thilos Yisrael for the salvation provided by Hashem. So it should be speedily in our days.

_____________________________________________________________
Copyright 2026, Rabbi Josh Rapps, Edison, NJ. Permission to reprint this Shiur, with this  notice, is granted. Shiur Date: 1956.

