

The Rambam in Hilchos Megila Vchanukah devotes
the first 2 chapters of Hilchos Megila and
Purim and the last 2 chapters to Hilchos Chanukah.
Why did he link them together? The Shulchan
Aruch reverses this order and places Hilchos
Chanukah before Hilchos Purim. Historically, Purim
preceded Chanukah by some 200 years. The
Rambam in Hilchos Chanukah links Chanukah to
Purim (3:3) and says that anyone who is obligated to
fulfill Mitzvas Megila is obligated in Mitzvas
Hadlakas Ner Chanukah. Why does the Rambam
emphasize so strongly this link between
Chanukah and Purim?

The Rambam in the preamble to Hilchos Megila and
Hilchos Chanukah says that they contain 2
Mitzvos Mdivrei Sofrim that are not included in the
613 biblical Mitzvos. The Rambam clearly
disagrees with the Baal Halachos Gedolos (BHG)
who includes 7 Rabbinic Mitzvos including
Purim and Chanukah in the 613 Mitzvos. The
Rambam says that it is a well known principle that
Megila is a Takanas Neviim, enacted by the
prophets.

The Rav said that the Rambam did not put Purim
first simply because historically  Purim preceded
Chanukah. The Gemara (Megila 7a) says that Esther
requested that the Anshei Kneses Hagedolah
establish Purim for subsequent generations as a
holiday, as a day on which the Megila is read (see
Rashi).  (They were reluctant to do so out of fear of
provoking the nations that surrounded them.)
The Gemara says (14a) that there were 48 prophets
and 7 prophetesses in Jewish History, and
none of them removed or added any Mitzvos with
the exception of the obligation to read the
Megila (enacted during the period of the latter
prophets). What was the basis for permitting this
addition? It is a simple Kal Vchomer, if
BnayYisrael said Shira when they were saved from
the hand of Pharoh who did not threaten them with
physical extinction, how much more so should
they be obligated to recite Shira on Purim when they
were saved from death at the hands of Haman.

Apparently Chazal were concerned with the
prohibition of Baal Tosif, of adding new Mitzvos
beyond the 613 biblical obligations. Why were
Chazal so concerned about Megila? After all there
are many Shevusim by Hilchos Shabbos as well as
Shniyos Larayos that are not biblical in nature,
yet were enacted by the Rabbis. The general
category of Seyag L'Torah comes under the heading
Mishmeres Lmishmarti and not Lo Tosiifu Vlo
Tigreu Mimenu. Avos Drabi Nasan says that
Seyag is enacted to reenforce a Lav Kal, a minor
prohibition. No one has ever questioned the
concept of Seyag. In fact Shlomo Hamelech enacted
Seyagim as well. Megila was the first time
that Chazal registered a concern about adding a
Mitzvah. The Ramban says that when Hashem
caused them to see that there was a hint to Megila in
the Torah they accepted it. It was the Kal
Vchomer cited in the Gemara that clinched it and
negated the concerns of Chazal. Reading the
Megila is equivalent with the recitation of Hallel.
However, how did this resolve Chazal's concern
of Lo Tosifu? If this Mitzvah to recite Hallel via the
Megila is a Mitzvah Drabanan, then why were they concerned at all?

The Rav explained that there are some Mitzvos that
the obligation (Chiyuv) and the fulfillment
(Kiyum Hamitzvah) are both rabbinic in origin. For
example Arava on Hoshana Rabbah.  There
are other Mitzvos where the Chiyuv is Rabbinic but
the Kiyum Hamitzvah is Biblical. For example
the Rambam in Hilchos Avel says that there is a
Rabbinic obligation to visit the sick, to comfort
the mourners, to eulogize the dead, to provide for
weddings etc. The Rambam says that these are
acts of kindness that have no upper limit and even
though these obligations are Rabbinic they all
come under the category of Vahavta Lrayacha
Kamocha. Apparently according to the Rambam
there is a Kiyum Doraysa. Yet, these are distinct
Rabbinic obligations and  the Rambam discusses
which has precedence if one is faced with
performing both at the same time. On the other hand, all
these acts of Chesed are equal from the viewpoint of
the biblical obligation of Vahavta Lrayacha
Kamocha. We do not find other biblical Mitzvos
that the Rambam discusses which instantiation of
a Mitzvah should take precedence. Other Mitzvos
that are Rabbinic in obligation yet have a
Kiyum Doraysa are Krias Hatorah and Tefila where
the concepts of Tefila and Krias Hatorah are
biblical in that they are connected with Talmud
Torah and Avodah Shblev. These Mitzvos have in
common that the general obligation to perform the
Mitzvah is Doraysa (Talmud Torah, Avodah
Shblev), but the particulars of when and how the
Mitzvah is to be performed is Drabanan. We find
that the patriarchs all prayed. [The Rav said in the
name of his father, Reb Moshe ZT"L, and his
grandfather Reb Chaim ZT"L that the Rambam is
correct that Tefila is Doraysa because it was
impossible to imagine that Klal Yisrael did not pray
until the Anshei Kneses Hagedolah came
along.]

Megila is a Mitzvah Drabanan but there is a Kiyum
Doraysa of Hallel, in that we are obligated to
recite praise of Hashem and relate the great miracles
that He performed on our behalf. The biblical
obligation to praise Hashem can be fulfilled on any
day around Purim, it was the Rabanan that
fixed the obligation to praise Hashem on the
fourteenth day of Adar. The use of the Megila as the
vehicle for expressing Hallel to Hashem is
Drabanan.  Besides the obligation to recite Hallel,
the Megila is a vehicle to perform the Mitzvah to
obliterate the memory of Amalek, M'chiyas
Amalek. (One of the reasons Chazal resisted
including Esther in Kisvei Hakodesh was that it
would constitute a fourth reference to Amalek.
Besides the Megila, Amalek is mentioned 3 times
In Tanach. Chazal thought that there was a
maximum of 3 times Mdoraysa that Amalek could
be mentioned as derived from the verse Ksov Zos
Basefer (Megila 7a) until they realized that there
was a biblical hint that it could be mentioned a
fourth time in the Megila, which is part of
Kesuvim). The third reason that Krias Hamegila is a
Kiyum Doraysa is because Megila is part of
Torah Shbichtav, so reading it fulfills the Mitzvah
of Talmud Torah. Therefore there is no
problem of Lo Tosifu, because even though the
obligation is Rabbinic, the required action fulfills a
well defined Kiyum Mitzvah Doraysa.

When it came time to enact the holiday of
Chanukah, Chazal had the same question again of
Lo Tosifu. The answer was to look at Purim. The
Gemara said that based on a Kal Vchomer we
recite Hallel (the Megila) on Purim (as noted above
the distinction between Geulas Mitzrayim
which was from physical bondage, as compared to
the Geulas Purim that was from death to life).
The same reasoning applied to Chanukah, which
was a time of Gzeiras Shemad, forced
conversion, where there was also a life and death
struggle. Chanukah, like Purim, is also a
Rabbinic Mitzvah that has a Kiyum Doraysa, that of
offering Shevach V'hodaah to Hashem and
to publicize the great miracle that occurred. The
Rambam discusses the laws of Megila first
because Purim is a prerequisite to understanding
Chanukah and how it was enacted by Chazal.
That is why the Rambam links them so tightly and
says (Hilchos Chanukah 3:3) that anyone who
is obligated in the Mitzvah of Krias Megila is
obligated to kindle candles on Chanukah.

How did Esther know that a Chiyuv Hamitzvah that
is Drabanan and has a Kiyum Hamitzvah
Doraysa does not violate Lo Tosifu? One could ask
the same question regarding the 4 fast days:
how was Jeremiah permitted to enact these fast
days? Didn't this violate Lo Tosifu? The answer is
that since the obligation to fast in a time of crisis is
Doraysa, Jeremiah was able to enact a
Rabbinic obligation to fast specifically on these 4
days. The fact that we keep the 4 fast days that
are mentioned in Zechariah  is also a major proof in
favor of establishing the holiday of Purim and
the associated day of fasting.

The Rambam defines Megila (and Chanukah) as
Takanas Haneviim, a Mitzvah Mdivrei Kabalah.
A Mitzvah Mdivrei Kabalah is a Mitzvah Drabanan
that is mentioned in Tanach where Hashem
instructs  the prophet regarding it. There are 3
Mitzvos Mdivrei Kabalah: Mikra Megila, Kibbud
Voneg Shabbos (Hilchos Shabbos 30:1), the fast
days (Hilchos Taanis 5:4).The proof that Esther
was right was that the Megila was included in
Kisvei Hakodesh, granting it the same status of
Divrei Kabalah as Kibbud Voneg Shabbos and the 4
fast days which were never considered as
violations of Lo Tosifu.

It is interesting to note that the prophet has a
dialogue with Hashem where he is told to keep the
four fast days. Despite this, fasting on these days is
still considered a Rabbinic obligation, even
though the Kiyum Hamitzvah of fasting and praying
to Hashem in a time of crisis is a biblical one.
These Mitzvos are even more paradoxical in that if
one would desecrate the written section in the
Navi where these Mitzvos are mentioned he would
violate an Issur  Doraysa and receive lashes
for desecrating Kisvei Kodesh, however the
obligation to fulfill the Mitzvah itself is Rabbinic in
nature.

The Rambam (Megila 1:1) says that everyone is
obligated with the Mitzvas Krias Hamegila,
including women, converts and freed slaves. Why
are only freed slaves obligated? After all,
Canaanite slaves has similar obligations to women
so why did the Rambam omit them? (This is
the only Mitzvah that a woman is obligated to
perform but an Eved Canaani is not.)

Also, why did the Rambam mention converts
explicitly? Converts are obligated in all Mitzvos?
Chazal derive from the words Kal Hanilvim
Alayhem in the Megila that there was a special edict
to include converts, including all future converts,
who otherwise would not have been included in
the Mitzvas Purim. We do not find special mention
of converts by other Mitzvos. Why single out
converts with regards to Purim?  (Actually this
question can be asked on the Megila itself.)

The Rav explained: the Megila describes how the
Jews were victorious in battle and how they
came to enact the days of celebration after their
victory. It is explicitly stated that the Jews outside
of Shushan rested on the fourteenth day of Adar
while the Jews of Shushan rested on the
fifteenth. This was a spontaneous act of rest after the
miracle of vanquishing their respective foes.
The following year they celebrated on the same days
as a Minhag, custom. The Megila later notes
that Mordechai wanted to codify the observance of
these days as days of feasting and Yom Tov
on all the Jews and on all those that joined them, Al
Kal Hanilvim Alayhem. Mordechai enacted
the days of Purim as days of feasting and joy based
on the Minhag of the previous years that they
had already established to celebrate these days. The
distinction between when Chanukah and
Purim begin bears this point out. The Jews
completed their victory and began their celebration
immediately on the twenty fifth of Kislev. Purim is
celebrated the day after the victory was
concluded. Why not celebrate immediately after the
victory on the thirteenth of Adar? Because
Mordechai simply codified the Minhag which was
that they rested on the day after the victory.

Since the celebration of Purim was based on the
Minhag established by those that participated in
the victory, anyone who did not participate in the
festivities that first year would not be included
in the obligation in subsequent years. Even though
many people converted to Judaism in that
period, Vrabim Misyahadim, however these people
did not fully share the great joy of the
salvation of the Jewish nation from imminent
destruction. They were mourning for the many
members of their own (former) family who
conspired to murder the Jews and were killed during
the battle. That is why there was a need to enact a
special edict to include converts in the
celebration of Purim and for them to accept upon
themselves to observe the Mitzvah of Krias
Megila and the days of Purim. Only in his
subsequent letter to codify the Minhag, did Mordechai
seek to establish the days of Purim as days that work
was forbidden. In the same letter he sought
to include the converts that did not participate in the
celebration immediately after the great
victory. Bnay Yisrael did not accept the Issur
Melacha because that was not part of the original
Minhag, but they did accept the days of Purim as
days of feasting and happiness based on the
Minhag. They also accepted that all converts,
including future generations, should celebrate
Purim.

Had a convert been obligated in Purim because he is
obligated in all Mitzvos like any other Jew,
then there would be no reason to exclude an Eved
Canaani, who has the same level of observance
as a woman based on Gzeirah Shava of Lah Lah.
Since Eved Canaani was not included in the
Takanah of Kol Hanilvim, only complete converts
were, he is not obligated in Megila even though
women are. However a freed slave was included in
the Takanah of Kol Hanilvim Alayhem.
___________________________________________________________
Copyright 2026, by Rabbi Josh Rapps, Edison, N.J. Permission to
distribute this summary, with this notice is granted. Shiur date: 3/5/74
