**Shiur HaRav Soloveichik ZT”l on Purim and Megilas Esther**

What is the responsibility of the individual to put his life on the line in order to protect the community? This is the gist of the message that Mordechai sent to Esther. The  Rambam (Yesodei HaTorah 5:5) discusses the case where non-Jews surround a house and demand the extradition of any one person from the group in order to dishonor her and they then will spare the rest of the people in the house. The Halacha is that the threatened group is prohibited to turn over any individual even at the risk that all will be dishonored. The same is true if the non-Jew wanted to murder one person and allow the remainder to go free. They should reject the ultimatum and incur martyrs death, as they have no right to turn any Jew over (Rambam is based on a Mishne in Terumos). The individual has the prerogative to volunteer to sacrifice his life in order to save the community. But the community cannot force anyone to do so. Esther did not volunteer to approach the king. In fact she resented it. She argued with Mordechai and said that everyone knows that to appear before the king without an invitation was almost certain suicide. Yet Mordechai tried to coerce her by sending an unequivocally stringent message to her. Mordechai felt that he had a right to influence her by threatening her. How could he force her to sacrifice herself?

The Rav explained that the requirement to sacrifice one’s life on behalf of the community depends on the desire of the enemy. If the enemy wants to destroy the community then the individual is duty bound to sacrifice himself on behalf of the community. On the other hand if the enemy is interested in an individual then the community is duty bound to protect that individual to the point of sacrificing the entire group. Judaism was guided by the principle of defiance, to simply frustrate the intent and desire of the enemy. 

There is no difference between the demand to surrender any individual versus the demand to surrender a particular individual. In the former case, each individual can say why should I be the sacrificial lamb? As a result, the whole community should martyr itself in that case. If the enemy singled out an individual for extradition, if that individual is a criminal then they can turn him over. Otherwise they may not turn him over to the enemy. Even though in the end result the requested individual will be killed together with the community, still the community may not turn him over. The idea is defiance, not saving a life. This is the concept of Kiddush Hashem. Tosfos raised the question regarding the obligation to martyr oneself when coerced to violate the 3 transgressions (coercion to commit murder, idolatry, illicit sexual relationships). Tosfos asks regarding a case where one is forced to worship idolatry or to convert to another faith and it is clear that the individual does not accept the idol or other faith. Why not simply play along and externally accept the other faith while clandestinely continuing to observe Judaism? This was the philosophy of the Moranos. What difference does the sprinkling of water make as far as the individual is concerned? Tosfos offers no answer, but the Rambam does indirectly. The reason for not complying is that the non-Jew should not think that the Jew is willing to give up his faith. Defiance of any religious tyrant, even in cases where the action is coercive, demands the Jew to surrender his life. The net result will be that even though the Jew will ultimately lose his life, the goal of defiance and frustration of the desire of the non-Jew will be realized.

The fifth chapter of Megillas Esther records the conversation between Esther and Mordechai. He sent her a copy of the decree and commanded her to appear before the king immediately to plead with him on behalf of her people. The gist of her response to Mordechai was that there is only a far-fetched possibility that she would survive her mission to the king. It was well known that Achashvayrosh has seldom pardoned anyone who entered the inner court without an appropriate invitation. She advised Mordechai that it was still quite early to undertake drastic actions regarding the decree. After all the decree was sent out a couple of days ago, on the thirteenth of Nissan. Immediately Shushan was sullen and depressed and Mordechai donned sackcloth. However the execution of the decree was not scheduled to take place for another year. Mordechai’s request of Esther to approach the king at this point was very strange. After all Mordechai adopted Esther and raised her as his own daughter and Esther considered him her father. Esther had unlimited trust and faith in Mordechai. Esther replied to Mordechai that she has not been invited to appear before the king for 30 days. So why undertake a mission at this point that will almost certainly end in failure, personally for her as she would be killed and communally as a catastrophe for the Jewish people who would lose their advocate in the royal court? Why not postpone and wait for a more opportune time. Perhaps in the next few days a messenger from the king will arrive and invite her to appear before the king. After all there are still 11 months before the decree is to be enforced. During that time she will definitely have an opportunity to plead for the people. She did not refuse to go. Esther appeared to have a logic to her reasoning. 

Mordechai’s advice was in Halachic terms Rachok L’Schar V’Karov L’Hefsed, minimal chance of success, maximal chance for failure and loss. Yet Mordechai did not accept her argument. He sent her three very strident and forceful responses. The dialogue is recorded in summary format. But we can read between the lines and gain insight into their dialogue. Esther said if she should be killed then the Jews will lose their only chance for salvation. So Mordechai replied that Esther should not think that she is the only one who can save the Jews. If her mission to the king ends in failure and she is killed, Mordechai assured her that salvation will come from some other source, he does not know from where but it will surely come. This is an important principle in Judaism that no individual, no matter how important he may be in his generation should ever say that he is solely responsible for and capable of ensuring the salvation of the Jewish people. If he does not act for the salvation of the people, Revach V’Hatzaloh Yaamod Lyehudim M’Makom Acher, someone else will arrive on the scene and fill that role.

Mordechai also told Esther not to delay her mission to the king because perhaps her tenure as queen will end abruptly before she has the opportunity to perform her mission. After all, Achashvayrosh killed Vashti and replaced her with you. It is quite likely that over the year he will change his mind again and replace you with someone else. The Megillah tells us that even after he married Esther, his servants were still gathering virgins. He should have resolved all his urges after marrying Esther. So apparently he was still searching, perhaps for someone better than you. So Mordechai advised her not to delay her mission. (This is Rashi’s interpretation).

The Ibn Ezra offered a third explanation. Mordechai was perplexed as to why Esther was chosen as queen. She was not the prettiest of all the women. Chazal say that she had some charm, Chayn. Chayn does not mean beauty. [For example the Torah says that Noach found Chayn B’Aynay Hashem. Noach was not much better than his peers but he had some charm that Hashem found favorable.] Mordechai would stroll around the royal gate to inquire as to what was happening to Esther. He could not understand why his niece was chosen queen. He knew that she was chosen to perform a great task but he did not know what it was. The very moment he heard the edict he realized why she was chosen: to represent the people before the king. He was assured that if the Hashgacha selected her to save the Jewish community, then she would be protected from harm by the king and that her plea would be successful. So he replied that perhaps the reason that you were chosen queen in the first place is that the Hashgacha placed you in a position to intercede on behalf of the Jewish people.

In the Piyutim for Purim, the Kalir explains that the references in the Megillah to the king refer to Hashem. After all, why should we care that Achashvayrosh could not sleep. But rather the Megillah is telling us that the Hashgacha was involved in the miracle and that Esther was chosen to play her role within the drama.

The Rav explained that the Megillah has a very important lesson for the Jewish community, especially the American Jewish community: the idea of the common destiny of the Jewish People, Goral Meshutaf. No one can say that he personally is safe from harm if the Jewish people are exposed to communal danger. The Rav recalled his experiences in Germany in the 20s and 30s. At that time beastly anti-Semitism was rampant in Poland. The German Jews gave rather cogent reasons as to why the same situation could not happen in Germany. The German Jewish community was extremely integrated into German society and culture of the time, more so than American Jews of the 60’s. Integration of a community takes time and over the centuries that the Jews lived in Germany they had adopted the same language and many other mannerisms and intangibles that define societal and cultural integration. One could not read a paper or billboard without coming across Jewish names. The greatest philosophers, producers, writers, scientists were all Jews. Whereas the Polish Jewish community was segregated and despised by the local population, the Jews of Germany felt that they were very different than Polish Jewry. After all, Polish Jews lived in Poland for close to a thousand years, the Jew performed many tasks for the local Polish aristocracy. But they were never integrated into Polish society and remained a stranger to the Poles. Anti-Semitism was defined as the hatred and rejection of the perceived foreign elements and customs of the Jews vis-à-vis the Poles. The German Jews argued that they are in the royal palace and will be saved. The poor Jews in the ghettos will be killed. The logically paradoxical and impossible occurred and the entire community was decimated by the Nazis. This can only be understood within the context of the common destiny of the Jew. This is what Mordechai said to Esther. Mordechai suspected that subconsciously Esther thought she will survive the holocaust. After all who would threaten the beloved queen of Achashvayrosh? Not even Haman would dare to do so. After all no one even knew that she was a Jewess. So Mordechai admonished her against thinking that the royal palace would provide her personal security and safety. Mordechai told her that if she was concerned only with  her personal safety, he was sure that the Jews would be saved, but he was not too sure that she would. He told her that there was no security in the career of being Achashvayrosh’s queen. It might very well be that on the day of the pogroms, Achashvayrosh will decide to send you away and you will be engulfed in the holocaust around you and perish. 

The Rav said that Chaim Weitzman was a very capable man who sacrificed his career and life on behalf of the Jewish People. The Rav knew him personally. But according to the Rav, Weitzman suffered from a personality defect in that he believed he was responsible for the Balfour declaration. He felt that he was indispensable to the establishment of the state and the salvation of the Jewish People. The Rav said that this was not true historically, yet Weitzman felt embittered by what he perceived as a lack of gratitude on behalf of the Jewish People towards him in not appointing him Prime Minister. He was given the ceremonial role as President of the State, but he was not satisfied with that position. The Rav resented this in Weitzman’s personality. This was the message of Mordechai to Esther. Sometimes an individual is given the honor of acting on behalf of the Jewish People. But if he does not seize the opportunity, someone else will step in and act.

The Rav noted that there is a lot of Anti-Semitic literature regarding the story in the Megillah as to what transpired after Esther succeeded in persuading Achashvayrosh to remove Haman. The Rav said that he came across many articles that describe the Megillah as a terrible story of blood thirsty Jews who murdered innocent gentiles. We now begin to better understand Megillas Esther in light of events affecting Eretz Yisrael and the Jewish community from the 40s through the 60s. (Note that the Rav was talking about the situation in 1968, but his comments are so painfully appropriate in 5762/2002.) 

What happened? Essentially, after the downfall of Haman the edict was not removed. In Chapter 8 Esther pleads with the king to rescind the conspiracy of Haman and revoke the edict. To her surprise the king responded that he could not comply with her wishes, because according to Persian law a royal decree signed and sealed by the king’s ring may not be recalled or cancelled. Achashvayrosh agreed that Haman’s decree was wrong, and that he was punished accordingly, but there was nothing that could be done regarding the decree. Apparently Esther and Mordechai were not familiar with Persian law. Ether and Mordechai were dumbstruck. After all the purpose of their mission was not simply to kill Haman, it was to ensure the safety of the Jewish community throughout the Persian Empire. Their mission was a failure.

The solution is to arm the Jews and allow them to defend themselves. This would not result in a nullification of the original decree. The first decree said that the enemies of the Jews should arm themselves, like Russia did for Nasser and the Egyptians prior to and after the 6 day war. Yet an embargo was declared on selling weapons to the Jews which essentially prohibited them from defending themselves. [Just like the world did around the 6 day war.] It is ancient history that repeats itself in stunning detail in modern Jewish history as well. The same headlines appear in the papers today. The Jews are to be exterminated with no opportunity of self-defense. The Persians knew that the Jews would try to defend themselves. So an arms embargo was put in place.

Now with the change in policy on behalf of Achashvayrosh, they all realized the complexity of the problem. They were told to write to the Jews KaTov B’aynaychem. To this point the edict forbade the Jews the right to assemble and defend themselves. They were told that even though they could not cancel the edict, Esther and Mordechai could write to grant the Jews the right to assemble and organize armies to defend themselves. They were told to combat those individuals and armies that attacked them and laid siege to their communities, HaTzorim Osam, and those that harbored evil intentions towards them, Oyev. The 6 day war was the same situation.  The Megiallah tells us that the situation was reversed that the Jews were Sholet, exercised unlimited power over their enemies. Their enemies wanted to exercise such power against the Jews, power that the Jews could not resist. The Jews turned the tables on their enemies just like they did in the 6 day war. In order to defend yourself, you must kill your enemy. 

After the Nazi Holocaust and the 6 day war and the ensuing embargo on arms against Israel, we have a better appreciation of Megillas Esther. Had Achashvayrosh simply revoked his edict, the story of self defense against their enemies told in the Megillah would have been a different one. Had Russia not armed Nasser, the 6 day war never would have taken place. This is plain Pshat in the Megillah. 

The Navi tells us that Shmuel told Agag that just as your sword has robbed women of children, so to shall your mother be robbed. What is Shmuel referring to? Apparently Amalek acted the same way that the Palestinian terrorists act today. They would infiltrate the Jewish communities and kill women and children and then withdraw. Many mothers were bereft of their children because of these tactics. This was the way they would terrorize and confuse Yisrael. So Shmuel told him that he and his mother would be treated accordingly. 

Esther requested that the Jews of Shushan should be given a second day to hunt down the rest of those that meant to harm them. For Esther knew that there were still others who were waiting for an opportunity down the road to attack the Jews once they drop their guard. The Rav said he was told in the name of Tito that in 1967, that the war was won in the first four hours between 4 and 8 AM. Tito predicted that next time the first 4 hours will belong to their side, that of the Arabs. (Witness the first day of the Yom Kippur War.) Esther knew that the edict to kill the Jews was still in force and she was fearful of a surprise attack. So she advised that it was best to preempt their enemies. The Rav said that Israel in 1969 should act preemptively as well and strike Egypt, except that they were prevented by the Russians. The Rav said that the Megillah is very terse. You have to read between the lines to get the full story after which the parallels to the current situation facing Israel are obvious.

How did the holiday of Purim come to be as we have it now? The Megillah in Chapter 9 is very verbose in recording the history of Purim. The Ramban comments that (9:19) the Jews who lived in the open cities, Perazim, spontaneously accepted Purim. The Jews who lived in the walled cities did not accept Purim immediately. But there is no mention in this verse of those that lived in wall cities. Mordechai wrote to the Jews that Purim should be observed on the fourteenth and fifteenth and that the residents of the walled cities should observe Purim as well. [In 1968, the Rav mentioned that for the first time in a long time we now had multiple cities that required observance of Shushan Purim on the 15th of Adar, as they were walled cities from the time of Joshua. Chevron, the Ir Atika. The Rav noted that there were issues regarding the new city of Jerusalem, but there was no disagreement regarding the old section of Jerusalem.] 

The Ramban says that the residents of the unprotected cities spontaneously accepted Purim, since the Jews in the open cities were more open to danger. In the walled cities, the Jews felt protected by the local garrisons. They felt that they would save themselves even though the Jews in the small open cities would be exterminated. So they did not rejoice as much. At this point the precept of charity was still missing from the observance. So Mordechai wrote that the walled cities should join the open cities in the celebration. There were no exemptions from observing Purim, as no one can extricate himself from the common destiny of the Jewish People. We are called an Am, from the word Im meaning “with”, because we are all together in a common destiny. No Jew should persuade himself that he will be an exception. 

The Jews accepted what they started to do spontaneously in the open towns: to celebrate Purim. Mordechai now added that the entire Jewish community including those that lived in a walled and protected city and felt secure that the local garrison would protect them should also celebrate. The Jews in the walled cities were also in danger. The Rav noted that when the Cossacks wanted to murder the Jews, the Poles would give them access to the Jewish communities enter clandestinely and massacre the Jews. [The Rav noted that in the end the Cossacks would turn on their Polish allies and murder them too.] When a person is in a hopeless situation he reaches out for the slightest straw to save himself. So those in the walled cities felt protected. The Megillah tells us that Haman Tzorer KOL Hayehudim, Haman did not distinguish between the Jew who lives in a fortified and beautiful walled city and one who lives in an open unprotected shanty town. Therefore all Jews must participate in observing Purim. 

Mordechai includes the obligation of Matanos Levyonim. Mishteh Vsimcha commemorates and celebrates an event of personal salvation or success. But it does not manifest a feeling of solidarity among all Jews. I exchange gifts with my friends as an expression of celebration. But Matanos Levyomim demonstrated something more: a sense of solidarity. It is interesting to note that whenever the Torah talks about civil law interactions between Jews, it uses the term Ray’ayhu. For instance, if a person’s ox gores the ox of his acquaintance, Rayayhu. V’Ahavta Lrayacha Komocha. When a person conspires to murder his acquaintance, Rayayhu, clandestinely. One who conspires to commit murder is not a very good friend. However whenever the Torah speaks of charity it refers to the recipient as Achiv, his brother. Ki Yamuch Achicha Imach. Ki Yihye Bcha Evyon M’Achecha. Lo Tokpoitz Yadcha M’Achicah. Vraah Ayncha B’Achicha HaEvyon.  Pasoach Tifthach Yadcha L’Achicha L’Aniyecha. Ray’ayhu can be transitory. Achicah represents brotherhood that can never be severed. There is an identity of faiths, a sense of solidarity. Mordechai was not so interested that each Jew should celebrate individually his salvation. Mordechai wanted to implant in the Jews this feeling of solidarity that we are all brothers. Hence the requirement of Matanos L’Evyonim to unite the people.

Initially many Jews refrained from the celebration because they did not feel involved. Many American Jews ask why should they celebrate Yom Haatzmaut? After all they were not involved. The Jews in Jerusalem would have been massacred but the Jews in Boston and New York would have been secure. Or at least that’s what we think. This was the mentality of the Jews in the walled cities in the time of Mordechai. Mordechai sent epistles to all the Jews, near and far, to 127 states. After all there were certain provinces where Haman’s messengers had not reached and the decree to exterminate the Jews was not publicized. These Jews lived in security. The Jews were completely unaware of the decree. Suddenly an epistle arrives from Mordechai commanding them to celebrate, that the Jews were saved. They must have asked: celebrate what? Which Jews were saved? Why should the Jews in these distant countries celebrate? So Mordechai told them that even though they were not exposed to danger, the idea of solidarity is very important. Ultimately Haman did not differentiate between Jews. He intended to murder them all.

To this point Purim was accepted spontaneously by the affected communities and as an act of solidarity only by that generation. It was not yet accepted as a permanent addition to the Jewish calendar. The second letter from Mordechai commanded them to add it to the calendar for all successive generations and for all those who join us, Nilvim. Rashi says that this refers to converts. A convert must accept all the commandments, so why mention the convert specifically regarding Purim? The Rav explained that not only must the convert accept the commandments and our faith, but he must also accept and join our history. Even though his father had no connection to the events of Jewish history, the convert assumes this history as his own and becomes a part of Jewish history. He is included in Elokaynu V’Elokay Avosaynu, including our history.

Purim assumes a special place in Jewish law and within the Canon. The Rambam at the end of Hilchos Megillah says that in the eschatological age all of the Prophets and Ketubim will be nullified with the exception of Megillas Esther. Even though the memory of the disasters that the Jewish people lived through will be erased from our memories, the days of Purim will not be suspended as it says that Yemay HaPurim Lo Yaavru Mitoch Hayehudim. Why does Purim assume such an important role? 

Because the disaster could have occurred and the entire Jewish community could have been destroyed. Just like Hitler wanted to destroy the entire Jewish community and succeeded in destroying a third of the Jewish community, Haman also would have destroyed the entire community. Megillas Esther was called an Igeres. Esther insisted that it be included in the Canon and raised to the level of Kisvai HaKodesh. Her request was granted by the Sanhedrin and it became a book. Megillas Esther was invested with sanctity in the same way as Shema Yisrael. One studies a book. What can one derive from Megillas Esther? As a book, it carries symbolic content for all generations: Maasay Avos Siman L’banim. Its symbolic content according to Baalay Kabbalah is regarding Mitzvas Amalek. 

The Rav said in the name of his father and grandfather that we no longer identify people as coming from any specific nation, including Amalek. Yet the Mitzvah to blot out Amalek remains. How can that be? Amalek was a small Bedouin tribe that used to infiltrate Eretz Yisrael and carry out terrorist attacks, just like Fatah and the other Palestinian terrorists. Amalek is more than a tribe or racial group. Any nation or group who claims as its mission the extermination of the Jewish People, physically or spiritually, is ascribed the status of Amalek. Certain Arab groups certainly come under this category. R’ Moshe said that any nation that assumes the banner of Lchu Vnachchidem M’Goy Vlo Yizacher Shem Yisrael Od, such a group, a communist, fascist, nazi or Moslem group has a status of Amalek. From time to time we encounter such groups. German Jews were surprised to meet this hatred in WW2. As a result we lost the best third of our people in the Holocaust. Yet a short time after the terrors of Nazi Germany the Arabs are attempting to do the same. The Rav noted that in 1968 Faisal of Saudi Arabia proclaimed a jihad against Israel and the Jews in a speech in Mecca accusing the Jews of desecrated Moslem holy sites. It was an Amaleiki speech. (Note the similarity to Arafat and the PA…)The Rav said that certain groups in the communist empire are very close to the Amaleiki policy, if not physically, then definitely spiritually. Even though Russia professed that they do not want to destroy Israel, their goals are based on reasons beyond realpolitik, it is based on a hatred of the Jewish people. The Rav posited that an ideology that is rooted in atheism must hate the Jewish people, the people who have given the word of God to the world. We are the people of the Bible. 

Chazal lived in Persia and understood the climate of the time. The Jews of Persia enjoyed a status of equality. The Gemara in Megilla tells us that 12,000 prominent Jews were invited to attend the king’s reception. We enjoy great freedom in America but 12,000 Jews were never invited to the White House. The best proof of the equality of the Jew is that even after Esther revealed that she is a Jewess, Mordechai was appointed Prime Minister and no one complained about it. How is it possible that within one day their status should be changed and Haman should succeed in convincing Achashvayrosh to issue a decree to destroy the Jews? The same thing happened in Germany and in Russia. Jews were very prominent in formulating communist theory. With the exception of Lenin, Jews were the major force behind the communist revolution. How such a movement can incorporate Anti Semitism in its ideology is perplexing. The Rav used to oppose the demonstrations against Russia in the 60s, but over time reading the Russian media and seeing the racist caricatures of Jews in the Russian press convinced him to change his mind.

Chachmai Kabalah say that there is an Amaleiki, instinctive natural evil, in every man. This can also be called Tohu Va Vohu, an element and instinct of destructiveness and malice in each person. Chachmay HaKabbalah interpret the struggle between Tzelem Elokim and Amalek that they are locked in conflict. No one can be sure about himself. From time to time, the Amaleiki wakes up and emerges in every man and he becomes very aggressive and the personification of evil. The purpose of many laws in the Torah is to eradicate the Amalek that resides in every person. There are satanic and divine forces that reside in man. The Torah commandment to recall what Amalek did to us, refers not only to the historical Amalek but also to the Amalek in each of us. 

Megillas Esther discusses the struggle between Mordechai and Haman, good and evil forces in man. Sometimes that struggle emerges onto the historical arena. Everyone must look out for it. Chachmay HaKaballah say that the Megilla is the story of man’s struggle against Satanic forces that ultimately will end in the triumph of good over evil. All of us face the struggle of whether our actions will be interpreted as expressions of Tzelem Elokim or Amalek. 

This is a major difference between Judaism and western civilization. Judaism never rejected the human ability to conquer his environment. Judaism is much more progressive than all other religions in this regard. Take for instance the dilemma regarding medicine. If God makes man sick what right does he have to heal himself? Christian theology has not overcome this problem. Certain Christian sects to this day prohibit medical intervention. Judaism insists on man’s intervention, V’Rapo Y’Rapay. The Ramban says that anyone who is sick and does not consult a doctor is a Shofech Damim. Judaism wants man to take control of his environment and to conquer the satanic force within him. How does one fulfill Pru Urvu V’Kivshuha, how does one conquer the environment? By eavesdropping on nature and stealing its secrets. Unfortunately, sometimes man becomes malicious and abuses nature. But in this regards there is no discrepancy between Judaism and Western Civilization.

But Judaism and western civilization part company in their opinions regarding the worth and role of man. Western Civilization is basically optimistic about man. Left alone, man will not only become a powerful being, but also a kind and ethical one. Man does not require divine guidance. Judaism says that no matter how powerful man is, there is always a Satan within him that is at conflict with his Tzelem Elokim. We can never be sure who will win the battle. Judaism says that man cannot be left alone to his own devices to become a moral being. He requires divine guidance. Without faith in God, man will never be able to live in peace with his neighbor. On the one hand, Btzelem Elokim Asa Es Hadam, man has great potential to accomplish wonderful things, on the other hand he is a beast. 

This battle between the Jewish People and the nation of Amalek as well as the battle between the individual Jew and his personal Amalek is the eternal message of Megillas Esther, that will conclude in the eschatological age with the victory of Tzelem Elokim within man.

-----------------------------------

Copyright 2026, Rabbi Josh Rapps Edison, NJ. Permission to reprint this Shiur, with this  notice, is granted. (Shiur date: 1968. Nordlicht tape 2AA/1 and 2AA/2)

