The Seven Days of Lulav
The Torah commands us U’Lkachtem Lachem Bayom HaRishon,  take the Lulav on the first day of the Festival of Sukkos. This was extended to take the Lulav 7 days in the Temple, based on the subsequent obligation of U’Smachtem Lifnay Hashem Elokaychem Shivas Yamim, and you shall rejoice before Hashem 7 days. After the destruction of the Temple, Rabban Yochanan Ben Zakai instituted that Lulav be taken 7 days everywhere outside the confines of the Temple. The Gmara (Sukka 41a) quotes a verse from Jeremiah (30:17) in support of this institution: For I will bring healing to you and of your wounds I will heal you says the Lord for they called you an outcast, that is Zion whom no one seeks out (Ki Nidacha Karoo Lach Tzion He Ayn Doresh Lah). Why did Chazal derive the institution of taking Lulav 7 days outside the Temple from this verse? If the goal was to remember Zion, we have another set of verses from (Psalms 137), Im EshKachaych Yersuhalayim from where the Gmara (Bava Basra 60b) derives many commemorative restrictions and actions performed to remember Zion. Why not use that verse as the basis of the institution to take Lulav for 7 days, similar to how it was practiced in the Temple?
Apparently there are 2 kinds of Zchira, obligation to remember, associated with Zion. The first relates to mourning the loss of Zion and the great national disaster that resulted from the destruction of the Temple. This obligation to remember is based on depression and sadness in recognition of the tragedy, and manifests in restricting our celebrations and abstaining from higher levels of joy to recognize that without the Temple, there is a gaping hole in our lives. The second form of remembering relates to our obligation to think fondly of Zion on a regular basis, to seek out Hashem and the glory of the land so we can re-experience our close relationship, to be Doresh Tzion. The word Doresh connotes extreme longing and searching. We seek to recall the wonderful celebrations that took place in the Temple on a regular basis. As part of this, we are obligated to attempt to experience the joy associated with the observance of Sukkos and the Mitzva of Lulav in the Temple, to reenact the elation experienced by those fortunate to have witnessed it.
However there is a difference between the fulfillment of taking Lulav for the additional 6 days in the temple that was extended by Rabban Yochanan Ben Zakai and the obligation to take Lulav of the first day of Sukkos. The latter is based on the Obligation of U’Lkachtem, a mechanical act to physically take the Lulav and is fulfilled by simply lifting the Lulav in my hand. However, taking the Lulav for an additional 6 days in the Temple that was extended outside the Temple area by Rabban Yochanan Ben Zakai, is derived from the obligation of  U’Smachtem. Simcha, rejoicing before Hashem. This requires a Kiyum B’lev, an  experiential aspect similar to prayer and Krias Shma, that require a physical act or recitation, however the fulfillment is experiencing worship of the heart or accepting the yoke of heaven. Another example is Avaylus, mourning, that requires various physical acts, yet the fulfillment is experiential. A mourner who sits on the floor yet engages in acts that contradict the mourning experience does not meet the requirements of experiential mourning. Why should the mourner not display the manifestations of mourning on Yom Tov? Where did Chazal see the contradiction between mourning and experiencing Yom Tov joy? Chazal felt that engaging in these activities as part of an experience of joy or Simcha is inherently contradictory to the mourning experience required by Avaylus and they suspended the mourning experience in favor of the Simcha experience of Yom Tov.  
With regards to Lulav, a physical act of lifting the Lulav is required, however that is just the Maaseh Mitzva, the action;  the fulfillment is B’lev, an internal experience. The physical act is based on U’Lkachtem, a simple mechanical act of lifting the Lulav. This is all the Torah requires of the Jew on the first day of Sukkos. However, the Torah added another requirement of U’Smachtem Lifnay Hashem for 7 days. How do we know that this differs from the mechanical action required on the first day? Had the Torah wanted to extend the simple mechanical fulfillment, it would have said U’Lkachtem Shivas Yamim and you shall take the Lulav for 7 days. Apparently the shift to U’Smachtem requires a different manifestation to fulfill the obligation for the remainder of the 7 days, an experiential aspect based on the joy of being before Hashem. 
When the Temple stood, the experience of Lifnay Hashem was so overwhelming, that one had no choice but to exalt in it. Chazal say that Jonah experienced prophecy after he was overcome with the joy of the Temple during the festival.  After the destruction of the Temple, Chazal recognized the challenge presented to Judaism of no longer being able to experience the intoxicating feeling of Lifnay Hashem that we experienced when the Temple stood. How would we experience Shivisi Hashem Lnegdi Tamid? They had two choices: dispense with the feeling of Lifnay Hashem that was so fundamental to Judaism or adopt the opposite approach, to extend the concept of Lifnay Hashem wherever the Jew may be, no longer confining it to the Temple area. They accepted the second alternative. Essentially, the Kedusha of the Temple associated with Lifnay Hashem has been extended ad infinitum. Rabban Yochanan Ben Zakai’s institution perpetuated the memory of Beis Hamikdash through “Kedusha Imperialism”, spreading and extending it everywhere. The Jew can now remember, experience, the joy associated with Lifnay Hashem wherever he is. This Zchira is fundamentally different from the obligation of the groom to remember Zion on his wedding day, or to leave an unfinished square cubit in one’s house, derived from Im Lo Ezkraychi. This Zchira requires us to remember the joy of Jerusalem in its prime by simply experiencing Hashem wherever we may be, by engaging in Drisha. 
The Gmara quoted the verse from Jeremiah that focuses on Drisha not Zchira as Drisha implies actively seeking something. If Hashem is no longer to be found on the Temple mount, we must seek Him everywhere. When the Temple stood, all the Jew needed to do to feel the presence of Hashem was enter the Temple and absorb the beauty and exalted spirituality of the Temple. An especially perceptive heart was not required. However it is much more difficult to find Hashem in exile; we have to exert great effort to seek and place ourselves Lifnay Hashem, to re-experience that feeling of Zion of old, similar to the effort required to seek a lost precious article. Chazal quote Jeremiah, who tells us that even though no one else seeks Zion, we have an obligation to seek her, to re-experience the feeling of U’Smachtem Lifnay Hashem that we had in the Temple for all 7 days of Sukkos, that has now been extended everywhere, manifesting our perpetual Drishas Tzion.
© Copyright 2026 Rabbi Josh Rapps. Permission to distribute this summary for individual use, with this notice, is granted. Distribution through electronic or printed media without the author’s permission is prohibited.

