Upon his return from Charan and his assignment to find a wife for Isaac, Eliezer reports the results of his mission to Isaac. The Torah records that Isaac brought Rebekah into his mother's tent and he married her and loved her. Isaac was consoled over the loss of his mother. Abraham sent Eliezer to find a wife for Isaac in Charan. Why didn't Isaac report on his mission to Abraham before he spoke with Isaac? Also, Rashi says Eliezer told Isaac how he enjoyed קפיצת הדרך, the shortened travel time that allowed him to complete his mission in little more than a day. Why was it necessary to relate the details of his trip to Isaac?

While Abraham sent Eliezer on his mission, the ultimate beneficiary of the mission was Isaac. He was the one who would have to decide whether or not to marry Rebekah. The Talmud tells us: (קדושין מא:א):
דְּאָמַר רַב יְהוּדָה אָמַר רַב אָסוּר לָאָדָם שֶׁיְּקַדֵּשׁ אֶת הָאִשָּׁה עַד שֶׁיִּרְאֶנָּה שֶׁמָּא יִרְאֶה בָּהּ דָּבָר מְגוּנֶּה וְתִתְגַּנֶּה עָלָיו וְרַחֲמָנָא אָמַר וְאָהַבְתָּ לְרֵעֲךָ כָּמוֹךָ 

A man must see and meet a woman prior to betrothing her, lest he subsequently find a blemish that will cause him to despise her. Building an effective marriage requires both potential mates to meet and get to know each other beforehand.  Abraham recognized the need for his son to marry and assume his place as the heir to his Mesorah and  responsibility for the covenantal community. He required a partner and wife to accomplish that task, just as Abraham had Sarah by his side. He therefore sent Eliezer on the journey to find a prospective bride. However, the decision to marry her and make her  Isaac's partner and wife was completely up to Isaac. No matter how much Abraham may have wanted this match to succeed, ultimately it would be Isaac's decision. 

There was no purpose for Eliezer to report to Abraham upon his return. He had to go directly to Isaac to have him meet Rebekah and decide if she was the right match for him. If Isaac rejected Rebekah, then Eliezer's mission would be incomplete and he would have to continue to seek a wife for Isaac. The Torah records that Isaac readily accepted Rebekah and she indeed became the wife and partner Abraham envisioned for his son.

Isaac encounters Eliezer within several days of Abraham sending Eliezer on his mission. As the Torah records, his trip barely lasted a couple of days. Isaac was surely aware that his father had entrusted Eliezer with this important task. Abraham had him swear an oath to travel back to his homeland and family to find a wife for Isaac. Only if he was  unsuccessful in finding a wife there, was he permitted to consider local alternatives. 

Isaac knew that the journey to Charan would take time and he likely did not expect Eliezer to return for an extended period. Suddenly, only scant days after embarking on his mission, Issac discovers that Eliezer has returned. He most likely thought it impossible that Eliezer could have fulfilled his obligation to travel to Charan and Abraham's family so quickly to find a proper wife for Isaac. He may have suspected that Eliezer was attempting to deceive him and his father by finding a local girl and claiming she was from Charan and Abraham's family. Eliezer therefore explained to Isaac how he was able to complete his mission so quickly and his success in locating and bringing back a woman who fulfilled all the requirements Abraham imposed on him. He told Isaac of his miraculous journey to, and return from, Charan, how the water miraculously rose towards Rebekah, how she responded appropriately to all his questions and that she indeed was from Abraham's household. Isaac met Rebekah and when he brought her  into his mother's tent, his mother's special aura returned. Isaac knew Eliezer was indeed telling the truth, he was consoled over the loss of his mother and married Rebekah. Eliezer had indeed successfully concluded his mission.

Copyright 2021, Rabbi Joshua Rapps. All rights reserved. Permission granted to print for individual use. Inclusion in and/or distribution via printed or electronic media is prohibited without permission of the author.
