The files in this section are translations of articles that appeared in the Yiddish paper Der Tag, between 1954 and 1955. The editors of the paper considered the Rav ZT"L one of the leading spokesmen for Orthodox Judaism at that time, and posed a series of questions to him regarding the viability of the Orthodox Jewish Community as well its position regarding cooperating with the conservative and reform branches of Judaism. The questions and answers are still relevant today, almost 70 years later. The article regarding the utility of the Einstein Mediscal School appears in a printed collection of translated articles written by the Rav. I include it here to provide the complete set. 

In my opinion, the Rav's Yiddish lectures and writing are beautiful and spellbinding because they were presented in a straight forward Yiddish, which was his native language, especially when it came to למודי קודש. I would venture a guess, that for those familiar with Yiddish, the Yiddish Shiurim were much easier to listen to and appreciate. To me, the Rav was absolutely spellbinding in Yiddish, grabbing your attention, taking you on a roller coaster of emotions as his voice rose and fell. It felt to me that he was speaking to me, not at me. There was spontaneity to the Yiddish lectures that I did not detect or feel in his English language lectures. I am thankful to my parents for having been able to imbibe Yiddish at home and at school in my early years, which gave me the gift of understanding the words of the Rav. I would suggest learning Yiddish to those who do not speak or read it and would like the experience of hearing the Rav at his most captivating.

I endeavored to remain as simple and transparent as possible in my translation and transcription. I translated the Yiddish as close to the article text as possible without embellishing. In various places I add some context, usually through **[Note]** type comments. In one place, the Rav noted he quoted from an article that was incomplete or missing some information, and I copied his note in the translation. The **Introduction article**, which is a work in progress, will provide background and context on the Rav and the Orthodox community during the period these articles appeared. The articles are provided in markdown **(.md)** and printed **(.pdf)** formats.

* [Introduction - TBD]
* [Questions Regarding Future of Orthodoxy in America.md](https://github.com/RavSoloveichikTorah/Torah/blob/master/Articles%20On%20Orthodocy/Questions%20Regarding%20Orthodox%20Judaism%20in%20America.md)
* [Questions Regarding Future of Orthodoxy in America.pdf](https://github.com/RavSoloveichikTorah/Torah/blob/master/Orthodoxy/Questions%20Regarding%20Orthodox%20Judaism%20in%20America.pdf)
* [Orthodox, Conservative and Reform Jews In America.md](https://github.com/RavSoloveichikTorah/Torah/blob/master/Orthodoxy/OrthodoxConservativeJewsInAmerica.md)
* [Orthodox, Conservative and Reform Jews In America.pdf](https://github.com/RavSoloveichikTorah/Torah/blob/master/Orthodoxy/OrthodoxConservativeJewsInAmerica.pdf)
* [Can Men and Women Sit Together in Shul.md](https://github.com/RavSoloveichikTorah/Torah/blob/master/Orthodoxy/menAndWomenSittingTogether.md)
* [Can Men and Women Sit Together in Shul.pdf](https://github.com/RavSoloveichikTorah/Torah/blob/master/Orthodoxy/MixedSeating.pdf)
