The Haftorah for Parshas Vayera is comprised of two stories involving the prophet Elisha. The first relates the story of the Obadiah’s widow who was oppressed by the people who lent him money to hide and feed the 150 prophets he hid to keep them safe from King Ahab and Queen Jezebel.  These people demanded payment after Obadiah’s death and were ready to seize her children for lack of payment. Elisha tells her to borrow as many vessels as he can from her neighbors and close the door behind her that none should observe what is happening. Miraculously the lone flask of oil brings forth oil to fill all available vessels and she is commanded to sell the oil to pay her debtors and support her family with the remainder of the proceeds from selling the oil. 

The next story involves the childless Shunamite woman who provides a place for Elisha to stay and is promised a child by Elisha. The child ultimately joins the wheat cutters in his father’s field, takes ill and is brought home where he dies and is placed on Elisha’s bed while his mother goes off to find Elisha. He returns with her and revives the child, telling the mother to lift the child and take him back.

The connection between Parshas Vayera and the second half of the Haftorah is clear. In both cases, childless women are promised they will give birth to a child in a year’s time. Both are incredulous but the word of Gd is fulfilled and a child is born to each of them. What is the connection between the Parsha and the first half of the Haftorah? It is interesting to note that Sfardim only read the first part of the Haftorah, with its less obvious connection to the Parsha, and omit the second half that appears to be more relevant. What is the connection between these stories and Parshas Vayera and facilitate the customs of both Sfardim and Ashkenazim?

Let us begin by examining the connections between the Haftorah and Abraham. Abraham sets the prime example of how a Jew should live, react to his situation and fight for what is right. The first life lesson all Jews should derive from Abraham, regardless of station, is that nothing comes easy to him. The Torah tells us Gd tested Abraham, והאלקים נסה את אברהם,  and some interpret it as נשא, lifted Abraham withstood the tests he was faced with and that raised his stature. Elisha requested a double portion  of prophecy as compared to Elijah and was tested as well. Trials and tribulations enhance the individual. Abraham was lifted by Gd after the Akeida – he became greater than he was before the Akeida. Only after his status was raised at the Akeida would Gd obligate him with an oath. 

Noah did not raise his voice to protest the impending destruction of the world because of the corruption and sin all around him. He was told to build an ark and simply complied. On the other hand, Abraham’s commitment and willingness to sacrifice for others was tested many times. His prayer for the people of Sodom is an example. Abraham interceded forcefully on behalf of Sodom. One could have forgiven Abraham had he chosen to remain silent and simply allowed Gd to destroy Sodom and the surrounding cities. After all, everything about Sodom screamed opposition to the message Abraham preached to the world. One can preach a positive message so long as there is no real life contradictory example to his message. It was difficult for Abraham to preach the value of adhering to a moral lifestyle when the people of Sodom broke every moral rule and seemed to be living a good life. (Malachi 3:15) גם בחנו אלקים וימלטו למה שמרנו משמרתו. Had the Jews seen that the righteous are successful and the wicked fail it would have been easy for them to follow the proper path. King David said (Psalms 1) אשרי האיש אשר לא הלך בעצת רשעים, it is easy to see the value in a moral lifestyle when there is no contradictory example. But as Malachi says, we sacrificed much for Him and got nothing for it and now we follow the example of those who rejected His will and we are happy. 

The world  repeatedly demonstrates that wickedness is rewarded. Look at Russia and Nazi Germany. Where the basic norms of good and evil were reversed. Abraham and Sodom were polar opposites. Abraham preached charity while Sodom cruelly put the practitioner to death. Yet Sodom was a successful city, Lot chose to live there because they were successful despite their outright rejection of the Gd and the lifestyle preached by Abraham, perhaps he was drawn to it. Lot said to himself why should he follow Abraham’s example to follow an unseen Gd on a journey filled with difficulties. Lot rejects Abraham’s message,saying אי אפשי לי לא באברהם ילא באלקיו.  

Abraham surely visited Sodom multiple times and realized how wicked they were and how dangerous their evil lifestyle was. His mission to spread morality to the world would have been much easier had Sodom been destroyed. If evil thrives and is successful multitudes and nations fall in line with their craven ideologies. On the other hand, the world would take notice if evil was halted in its tracks and prevented from taking root in the world. Had Hitler ימש"ו been successful the world would have fallen in line with his murderous plans. The collapse of the wicked regimes of today would make a strong impression for proper behavior and justice. Yet Abraham was willing to accept humiliation and allow Sodom to survive. He thought it was better he be mocked and the people of Sodom  survive. He looked for any chance to plead their case, even if there were only 10 righteous people among the cities of thousands.

Among the difficult tests one faces is doing something good for the right reason yet people assume the worst about his intentions. Abraham endured these tests. The first test was in Parshas Lech Lcha, when war broke out between the 9 kings, and Abraham was informed that Lot was captured. At most, his involvement should have been limited to freeing his nephew, not to vanquish the oppressors and return the five captured cities to their previous rulers and way of life. Yet he freed them all and returned them to their previous status. Why did he do all this? Abraham operated according to the principle of והאלקים יבקש את הנרדף. While the people of Sodom were free, their actions indicted them as evil and sinful, רעים וחטאים  לשם. Once they were captured by כדרלעומר and the other kings, they were entitled to the benefit of the doubt and to be rescued.  Judaism’s philosophy is if your enemy is under siege you must help him. 

After defeating the four kings, the king of Sodom approached Abraham and told him to keep the spoils but return the people to him. The king was giving Abraham a message. I know that you only entered the war because you were interested in the money. You never were interested in the people. You have attained your goal so take the money and leave us alone.  Abraham put his life on the line only to have this despicable king of Sodom question his integrity and motives. Abraham became angry and swore he would not accept any reward, to show the king of Sodom how wrong he was.  This episode repeated throughout Jewish History. Anti-Semites said  Jews did not care about the two world wars or the 6 million Jews who were murdered so long as they profited in the end. 

This test of suspicion of Abraham’s actions occurred multiple times. Sara died after the עקידה. Prior to  the עקידה the Torah tells the story of Abraham’s sojourn in Grar, the taking of Sarah and the birth of Isaac. Why does the Torah emphasize that Abraham fathered Isaac, אברהם הוליד את יצחק? Why does it wait till Isaac is 40 years old to make this statement? The scoffers of the generation insinuated that Avimelech fathered Isaac. After all, Abraham and Sarah were childless for so many years, why should they have a child at this point in their marriage? To refute this lie, Gd fashioned Issac’s face similar to Abraham so all would know that Abraham indeed was Isaac’s father. When the child is young it is difficult to see the similarity of facial features. It takes years until one can see the similarity. After 40 years one could see the similarity. Apparently Hashgacha wanted Isaac to be born at that time to allow the ליצני הדור to voice rumors about Isaac’s lineage. Not only was Abraham tested by waiting 100 years for his child, part of his trial was to endure the rumors of people saying the child was not his. 

When Gd told Abraham to sacrifice Isaac, the ליצני הדור said that proves Isaac is not Abraham’s son. Which real father would sacrifice his son? It must be that Abraham realized that Avimelech, not Abraham, was the father and he was looking for a convenient way to eliminate the child. Sara died from anguish and torment after the Akeida, perhaps from the pain of the rumors associated with Isaac and the Akeida. Apparently the Hashgacha wanted Abraham to endure all the gossip claiming he did not want Isaac to inherit him because he wasn’t his son. As was the case with our Patriarch Abraham, this has been the lot of the lot of the Jews throughout history. When you want to build a sanctuary for Gd you have to stand up to the nations of the world and withstand their accusations. This is the story of the blood libels throughout Jewish History. The nations will insinuate the absurd that we use the blood of non-Jews for matzos. Yet this is what the Hashgacha wants.

The Haftorah for Vayera begins with the story of Obadiah’s wife. Obadiah hid, protected and supported 150 prophets during the reign of Ahab and Jezebel, who sought to eliminate all prophets. Rashi says Obadiah supported them with oil. Obadiah perhaps was more dedicated and acted with more מסירת נפש than Elijah. Ahab respected Elijah even though he disagreed with him and would never dare to harm him. Obadiah on other hand did not enjoy such immunity. By defying Ahab and Jezebel’s decree against harboring prophets, he knowingly put his life and that of his loved ones in danger. Their decrees were similar to the Nazis who decreed the death penalty to anyone who harbors Jews. Without the prophets, not even Elijah or Elisha alone could have preserved Judaism. Without Obadiah’s sacrifice, Judaism would have disappeared. He borrowed oil from many people to support the prophets. 

After Obadiah’s death, the oppressors who were his debt holders came to seize his children.  His widow approached Elisha and told him how devoted her husband was to the cause. She told him your servant, my husband, protected the prophets with his life. His primary mission in life was to be your servant, while being her husband was only a secondary priority.  Elisha told his widow to borrow vessels from her neighbors and fill them from the horn of oil. While oil would become the tool for her family’s salvation, Elisha told her it was not proper for a servant of Gd who uses something for a holy purpose to profit from it for their own personal use. For example. Those who baked the show bread in the Temple never gave their own children white flour bread lest people accuse them of stealing flour from the Temple to feed their own family. Same for the House of Avatinas who were masters of the Frankincense and guarded the secret carefully lest anyone accuse them of profiting from it.

Obadiah borrowed oil from people to take care of the prophets. In order to protect the prophets, he never told them what he did with the oil. People surely suspected he was not using the oil for charitable purposes and instead was using it for his own needs. Elisha could have told his widow to call in her neighbors to witness the miracle of filling the vessels from the single horn of oil. Instead he told her to gather vessels and close the door so no one should see what she was doing. The neighbors must have suspected there was no miracle, rather  she had a barrel of oil that Obadiah his in the house she simply tapped that supply. Everything Elisha commanded her to do increased the level of suspicion among her neighbors.

Why did he tell her to sell the oil, why not simply pay back with the oil itself as it was as good as money, שוה כסף? At that time, oil was very expensive. People suspected that Obadiah was never protecting anyone. Instead he was stockpiling oil for his own profit. Instead of attempting to refute these rumors, Elisha wanted the suspicion to increase. He told her to sell the oil and pay her debts with the proceeds so all should know that she has oil. This was Abraham’s test. He had to persevere through Avimelech, the Akeida and the rumors.  Like Obadiah’s wife who was told to live off the extra oil, he had to show that one who works for the glory of Heaven, לשם שמים, must always persevere, even though he will always be suspected by others. [The Rav noted that he himself was suspected by others (including Jews and Yeshiva accountants) of embezzling funds that were intended for the Yeshiva.]

We now come to the story of Elisha and the Shunamite woman. Why did her child have to die? Why did the Hashgacha drive her to Elisha, who revived Him? We find in Tanach that the matriarchs were all barren, including Chana and the Shunamite woman. If Gd wanted to ultimately give them children, why wait and only do so after they endured great anguish and pray fervently? Because children are a great gift, חסד, from heaven. We take things for granted, especially wealth, health and our families.  We assume that this is the way it is supposed to be. If a person is healthy, he doesn’t even think of expressing gratitude to Gd for his health. He assumes it is coming to him and that is the way of the world. It is a great חסד that man can speak. If a jew realized this he would be more circumspect with his speech and refrain from לשון הרע. He would use the gift for proper purposes. He would appreciate the ability to think, understand, pray, the gift of normal body functions, like eating and digesting. Our Rabbis taught us to make blessings and express thanks before and after we eat. We are more appreciative when receive a gift than when we assume we are entitled to it. 

The gift of a child is such a חסד. People think it is natural to have children, If one thinks he is entitled to a child, he won’t cherish the child appropriately or educate them correctly. The Hashgacha wanted to teach Abraham he should not think that he is entitled to Isaac. After all, Where does it say that Gd must give him a child to inherit him? The same with Chana. When they finally got the child they realized how precious the child is and how much the parent must sacrifice for the child. When referring to his children, Jacob said the were a gift from Gd, (Genesis 33:5)  הילדים אשר חנן אלקים את עבדך. Jacob was referring to a מתנת חנם, a gift received without compensation, or a gift that was not required to be given but was greatly appreciated. He had no right to demand the 12 tribes. They were a gift. 

The same was true of the Shunamite woman. A woman wants a child more than anything yet she is not entitled to one. The Shunamite woman did not immediately understand how special a gift a child is. She didn’t train him specially, she didn’t encourage him to have a close relationship with Gd. Instead she allowed him to become a farmer, to cut wheat among the other farm laborers. 

On the other hand, Chana understood how to raise a child. The mother is driven to have a child by an instinctive need to love. More than anything, the mother wants to pass on that feeling of love to the child. Chana wanted a child to realize her dream of motherhood. A child to feed and hug; to play with and love. Yet she overcame these feelings and realized that there is a higher purpose to having a child. She promised ,if given a child, she would dedicate his life to Gd and His service. Parents who cannot have their own children are desperate to adopt a child because they want to show love to others. Great people demonstrate love for the whole world. Smaller people limit it for their own children. Chana could have wanted a child for selfish reasons; to silence Pnina and her taunts, to satisfy her maternal instincts to love a child. Yet she overcame these desires and dedicated the child to greater purposes, (Samuel 1, 1:11) ומורה לאיעלה על ראשו, he was dedicated completely to Gd. 

Midrash says that Leah missed an opportunity when she named her children according on her own needs. She should have named them based on how they would serve a higher purpose and mission for Gd. Father and mother should make sure to imbue the child with an appreciation of a higher purpose. To warm the child with Torah. The story tells us how he placed his mouth over the child’s mouth, his body over the child’s body. Why not simply say he prayed for the child and revived him? Because the prophet is teaching us in order to bring life to a child, the true life of Torah and commitment to Gd, a parent must be prepared to warm and inspire the child with his own body and soul. The parent cannot stand off to the side and allow the child to find his own course. The Shunamite woman did not realize this. After he revived the child. Elisha told her שאי בניך. He was telling her the purpose of your having this child is not just to hug and love him. It is to lift him higher so  his life will be lived in pursuit of greater and higher spiritual goals. Not to turn him into a farmer.  She now realized the real importance of the child. There was more to it than the maternal instinct. Chazal say that this child became the prophet Jonah. This story established the foundation for him to become a prophet.

The trails of the Akeida and the rumors and difficulties that accompanied the birth of Isaac showed Abraham that a son needs to be trained specially so the mission could be eventually transferred to the child and help him overcome whatever obstacles he may face along the way. The gift of a child is not only to have someone to love but someone who can be taught and trained to carry on the Mesorah.

This summary is Copyright 2020 by Rabbi Joshua Rapps. Permission granted for personal printing and use. Non-personal use of this article, such as use in electronic or print media, is prohibited without permission from the author.
